---
layout: learning
topics:
    - Neuronal Models
    - Neuroscience
learning_outcome: "To build a model of a LIF neuron using Python"
title: "The Leaky Integrate-and-Fire Neuron"
---

# The Leaky Integrate-and-Fire Neuron

The LIF neuron is a mathematical model which describes the membrane potential over a neuron over time when current is injected into the neuron. This is achieved by exploiting the laws of electricity to construct two equations: one to describe how the membrane potential changes in response to input current, and the second to describe the firing of a "spike" when the membrane potential reaches the firing threshold.

Before going any further, let's break down the name of the model to understand what it means.

### Leaky
    * Biologically: The cell membrane is not a perfect insulator so charged ions can pass through and eventually
        stabilize at the resting potential of the neuron
    * Electrically: The resistor of the circuit corresponds to the cell membran. If the resistance was infinitely large
        then the neuron would not leak.
    * Computationally: The membrane potential of the neuron decays over time

### Integrate
    * Biologically: Ion channels in the neuron open in response to incoming spikes, meaning the influx of ions is
        roughly proportional to the number of incoming spikes.
    * Electrically: The capacitor of the circuit builds up charge over time.
    * Computationally: The neuron integrates/sums the incoming signal over time

### Fire
    * Biologically: When the membrane potential reaches a certain threshold (mV), the neuron spikes. This causes a sharp
        influx of positive ions which travels down the axon of the neuron via the rapid opening and closing of ion
        channels in the axon.
    * Electrically: -
    * Computationally: When the integrated post-synaptic current reaches a threshold, it is reset back to the resting
        potential.

Now let's look at the two equations mentioned in the first paragraph.

## Modeling membrane potential

The change in membrane potential over time is modeled as a linear differential equation. This website doesn't support
LaTeX, but here's a plaintext version of the equation.

    Tau du/dt = -(u_t - u_rest) + RI(t)

Let's derive it using the laws of electricity

    1. 

